# FHIRCat - Enabling the Semantics of FHIR and Terminologies for Clinical and Translational Research 

## Specific Aims
Clinical and translational research increasingly relies on the existence of robust integrated data repositories to combine data from heterogeneous clinical systems with diverse information models. A variety of data models have been developed to provide standardized interfaces to data in a clinical data repository. These data models serve as a layer of standardization for clinical data within their own research network; however, if investigators want to reuse and integrate applications and research datasets across different research networks they still face huge challenges to effective data integration and discovery. This situation demands a global data model as a reference standard to facilitate data model harmonization and integration, as well as distributed analytics.

HL7 Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR) is an emerging next generation standard framework for the exchange of electronic health record (EHR) data. The FHIR specification defines a common vocabulary and mechanism for sharing EHR data independent of how it is actually stored. All of the major EHR vendors are developing standardized FHIR interfaces to their clinical data. One of the exciting aspects of FHIR is that it is among the first clinical data standards to incorporate the vision of the “Semantic Web” described by Tim Berners-Lee in his oft cited article from 2001. In the article, he asserts that the Semantic Web is the next "killer app" and outlines a formula for success: 1) Represent information and meaning in a single, universal format - Resource Description Framework (RDF); 2) Create a catalog of URIs that serve as shared identifiers for the RDF representation in a given context of use; and 3) Create tools for transforming existing data and knowledge resources into the universal language of RDF and URIs. This allows information from disparate sources and structures to be combined into a single, federated collection of “linked open data”. This linked data model allows clinical data to be combined with other linked data such as environmental, genetic, geographic, and any other relevant data and to be analyzed as an integrated whole.

The latest FHIR release 1) can represent clinical information in RDF and 2) provides a *catalog of shared standardized RDF identifiers for healthcare*. Tools exist today that can transform XML, spreadsheets, databases etc. into RDF. What is still missing, however, are mechanisms that convert to and from the shared standard FHIR catalog identifiers and their equivalent in other clinical information models. We have previously demonstrated that the combination of RDF, OWL semantics, and the Shape Expressions (ShEx) schema language could theoretically provide a robust platform for integrating disparate data models and paradigms under a single, resource oriented collection of interfaces, making it possible to complete Berners-Lee’s vision for healthcare which, in turn, creates new opportunities for clinical data integration and standards-based discovery and distributed analytics for clinical and translational research. The objective of this project is to design, develop and evaluate a novel informatics platform known as **FHIRCat** that leverages Semantic Web and Linked Data technologies, FHIR models/profiles, and ontologies for effective standards-based data integration and distributed analytics, enabling high-quality reproducible clinical and translational research. Our specific aims are:

**Aim 1: Develop FHIR ShEx/RDF specification and tools for FHIR data validation.** We will (a) develop the FHIR RDF stack to represent the core FHIR model, the FHIR constraint language, the FHIR extension model, and the FHIR "slicing" language in ShEx, a concise, human-readable, computable constraint language; (b) incorporate the ShEx/RDF specification as a normative part of the FHIR specification; and (c) publish, disseminate, and promote the RDF technology and associated tools throughout the wider FHIR community, with the goal of broad availability and utility of semantic clinical information. 

**Aim 2: Standardize and deploy the RDF-based data transformation between external models and FHIR.** We will (a) extend the ShEx specification to support RDF based transformations between RDF representations of external data models and FHIR; (b) develop automated mechanisms to enable the transformation of external schemas, as represented in XML Schema, JSON, etc. into corresponding ShEx schemas to form the foundation for ShEx based conformance declarations and mapping rules.

**Aim 3: Build and evaluate a FHIR ontology-based data access (OBDA) system interoperable with clinical data repositories across institutions in partnership with the CTSA National Center for Data to Health (CD2H).** We will (a) establish mechanisms to represent FHIR profiles and extensions as first class RDF catalogs; (b) develop transformations that allow FHIR Logical Models to be transformed into their semantic equivalent in OWL; (c) develop an OBDA model for managing data sources and creating mappings with community engagement and (d) implement a suite of open-source FHIR OBDA tools, and the ShEx transformation language. We will identify federated queries and distributed analytic use cases and evaluate the utility of the FHIR OBDA system, and disseminate open-source tools across the CTSA network through CD2H.

This work is supported by funding from NIH BD2K (U01 HG009450) and FHIRCat (R56 EB028101).

For more information, contact Guoqian Jiang <jiang.guoqian@mayo.edu> and Harold Solbrig <solbrig@jhu.edu>.
